So what exactly is this module about?
Well of course network requests, but what do I mean by that and why does this matter?
Let's say we have our script and our web page,
so the rendered HTML code which we see in the browser and our script logic and on the screen,
so the rendered HTML code, we might have a form where the user can enter some data and an unordered
list where we output a list of posts which the user created let's say,
that could be a simple web page we're building.
Now we might be powering this with the help of Javascript, though
I really want to emphasize that you could build such a page without any client side Javascript code,
you could dynamically generate this HTML code including the list of posts which might be created dynamically
totally on the server,
you could do all of that on the server with a language like PHP for example where you get data from
a database on the server and then you render different HTML content based on the page the user
is visiting
but in addition to that or as an alternative to that, we could utilize browser side Javascript to provide
a better user experience maybe, where we avoid unnecessary page reloads.
So we could have some Javascript code that runs in the browser attached to this web page basically where
we for example gather the user input, where we may be validate it to show the user an error message
if the title of a post is missing or anything like that and we're gathering all of that, we're maybe
also managing clicks on posts in that list of posts to for example start a deletion process, anything
like that.
Now besides that basic management of what we see on the screen or besides giving us these basic tools
of interacting with the user input, we might want to do more in client side Javascript, let's say the
user submits this form. The traditional way of sending this to the server would be to let the browser
do the default work and send that off to a server where you then have code to handle it.
Now with Javascript, you learned that you can prevent the default so that you can prevent this from
happening, so that the form is not automatically sent to a server and instead you can step in with Javascript
for example to validate it but then also to store it on the server from inside Javascript, to send a
HttpRequest to some backend, to some server without reloading the page which would happen if you
let the browser do its default and you might do the same for fetching posts, so that you fetch posts
to update that list of posts without reloading the entire page because if we only fetched updated posts,
we don't really need to re-render the entire page, right and therefore we might want to interact with
our backend which we need to have in any case from inside Javascript instead of letting the browser
do it with the default behaviors. Now our backend here would typically be an API and that stands for
Application Programming Interface,
that means it's a web server which exposes different so-called endpoints, different URLs to which
we can send requests and based on which request we send to which URL,
different things will happen on the server
and it's the engineers working on that server side logic,
so the people writing the server side code that decide which endpoints exist,
so which HttpRequests are supported, which URLs are offered.
Now as I said, traditionally the page and the browser might have communicated with that server directly
but that's not what we want here because that would mean that our server always needs to return a brand
new HTML page and therefore the page would need to reload, would need to be re-rendered, that could
lead to page flickering and in general, it might not offer the best possible user experience.
Instead what we want to do is we want to reach out to these different endpoints which I described, where
we for example might support on the server side a post request to the serverdomain.com/posts
and a get request to the same domain/posts where we might support certain pieces of data that
can be attached to the incoming post request and I'll come back to post and get in a second and where
therefore this server doesn't really want a default request sent by the browser but needs specific requests
targeting these specific endpoints and that's what we can do with the help of Javascript, with some behind
the scenes communication as I'd like to call it, behind the scenes because it happens without the page
reloading, without us refreshing the web page, instead will utilize Javascript to send requests that are
correctly configured and hold all the data the server wants to these individual endpoints.